So we've taken a look at, and, in fact,
spent quite a bit of time talking about
the philosophical ideas behind Deno.
I didn't cover all of them.
I just covered the ones that I felt were
most applicable to why Deno is the way
that it is.
And try to lay some ground work for
how Ryan sees things.
I highly encourage you to watch that video
because I don't wanna speak for Ryan.
I tried to summarize his ideas and
show you how it plays out, but
really you should listen
to it in his own words.
Okay.
So, installing Deno it's one commands,
cURL or PowerShell, your choice.
We're not gonna regurgitate
the docs here today.
I'll let you do that on your own.
It's not a very hefty install,
it should be relatively quick.
But once you have Deno installed,
then we can start by taking
a look at the rappel.
So let's do that.
Rappel stands for run, what does
it run execute, run in print loop.
Yeah.
Yeah, I always have to look that up.
So let's do that.
So let's just hit Deno and then that's
gonna put us into the rappel and
you can see where Deno 1.6.1.
And actually it just came out.
In fact,
I showed up yesterday to tech check.
And [LAUGH] I saw that
the version of Deno had changed.
So it's changing rapidly, but
it is considered stable in so
much is like the main API
isn't going to change on you.
Which is good.
Okay, so inside of the rappel we can
do something simple like console log.
Hello World.
There you go.
And you'll notice that like, we get
syntax highlighting, which is kinda cool.
I think Deno's doing that,
because no doesn't do that.
Anyway, that works.
And then it returns undefined,
because everything in
JavaScript has returned value.
Even if you don't specify one,
it just returns undefined.
So that's just how JavaScript works.
You can do multi line things
inside the Deno rappel right?
So we could do function hello,
take a name.
And then when you open this brace like it
just knows not to execute it knows that
you're gonna do a multi line here.
And then we can continue and
just log out name.
And then when we close the brace,
it will exit.
And then we can call this function, right?
And pass in, let's pass in World, right?
And then, it just says world.
It's just echoing back
whatever we pass in.
So that's the Deno repple.
The node repple by the way,
Ctrl D to exit does the same thing.
One of the big differences in the node
repple is that the node repple has this
thing called editor where you
can just type dash dot editor.
And then you're in this multi
line editor mode where it's
the same kinda thing or
it's like function Hello name.
But you see you're not getting the syntax
highlighting which is strange.
I guess Deno's doing that.
But it's not gonna until we actually,
it says Ctrl Ctrl + D to exit,
yeah, and then undefined and
then we can actually call this function.
But Deno doesn't have this
idea of this editor mode.
But it doesn't matter because honestly, we
don't spend a lot of time in the repple.
I don't know that any of you have I
don't I have been coding for 15 years.
I don't hang out in reppels just know
that that's the repple is there,
that's how it works.
So by the way, any guesses on
which language Deno is written in?
Both Deno and node use v8 for
executing the JavaScript.
That's where the JavaScript
is actually executed.
That's the Google's JavaScript engine.
But when they need to reach out to
the operating system to do things
like read files,
then that needs to be native code.
And Deno, it actually says on
the website what is written in but
it's more fun to go
spelunking into their repo.
So let's do that and go into the core
on Denos repo and look at these files
here and you can see they have .rs
extension and these are rust files.
Rust is a language that
was created by Mozilla.
And it was created to be for
highly safe concurrent systems.
And what they mean by that it's like C++,
except for the fact that it doesn't
allow for things like no pointers and
no pointer exceptions which are common.
And, so another interesting aspect
of rust is, it was also written in
part with contributions from Brendan Eich,
who also wrote JavaScript.
So the very tight circle here that
we're revolving in where Brendan Eich
created JavaScript also worked on rust and
Deno sort of bringing these
two things back together.
Node, by contrast, has native bindings
that are in a combination of C and c++.
So you might remember that earlier
we talked about Ryan being very,
very interested in IO performance
when he created node.
As he says he was obsessed with it.
And so this idea of highly
performant HTTP systems.
And so the question then becomes, what
is the difference between Deno and node?
And so this is from their own
benchmarks here, and in fact,
we might wanna take a look at it
just in case it's been updated.
And you can see all the relative
disclaimers about bench,
it has been updated okay.
This is execution time.
Let's get down to what I really wanna
look at is HTTP Server Throughput.
And so you can see here it's kind of
hard to tell because a lot of the colors
are the same but that blue line
at the bottom, the very bottom,
that's Deno's HTTP performance.
And that green line that's just
sort of like hovering above it.
That's nodes HTTP performance.
And so you can see that node
is more performance than Deno
is currently in terms of HTTP requests.
And that's something that
people will tend to point out
about Deno's that it's not as performant.
But it looks to me,
just as a casual observer and
not an expert in performance metrics or
HTTP systems that,
that difference is kind of small, right?
It doesn't appear to be extremely
large here between the blue dot and
the green dot.
Also, those of us that are writing
programmes, we are probably not building
systems that are that concerned about
performance to where we would say,
well, I can't use Deno because it's
simply isn't performant enough.
But it is important to note that as
of the time of this writing node
still faster in terms of
being an HTTP server.
Also, I wanna know what Hyper is.
I didn't even know what this is.
I tried to look this up, but
whatever this is, let's do that.
Look at this line.
Looks amazing.
She sees that.